Thank you. First of all, I would like to thank the organizers for inviting me here, for letting me come here with Carolina, and for accepting the talk.
So I'm going to speak about the joint project with Luca Chiantini, Giuseppe Favacchio, Brian Harvon, Juan Miore, Thomas Schenberg, and Justin Ashpond.
And for short, I will call these polytools, because there are three Polish members to Italian and to US-based members.
And this is our logo. See on my t-shirt, I guess Giuseppe also has the same t-shirt, but he didn't show me the talk.
So the logo is not just a logo, it has some meaning. I hope it will be visible after my talk.
And the talk is based on two preprints. The first one is the same as Giuseppe was talking about, but not chapter two, the rest of chapters.
And the second is the new preprint from 2023. Both preprints are available at ARCH.
So let me start with the definition of the property.
So if we have a property p, whatever property you would like, and a finite set of points z in the projective space over the fields of complex numbers.
I will drop this assumption. I won't write c in the next slides, but all the talk is for projective and dimensional space over c, or then three-dimensional space.
And we say that a set c is a general projection from a general point to a hyperplane, which is isomorphic to pn-1, as the property p.
So for example, we can think of the property p as being Gorinstein, and then we can speak of Gepro-Gorinstein sets.
We can also say about p being a complete intersection, so ci, and that is how Gepro-T sets come from.
And there are lots of open problems connected with Gepro-P sets.
So they are very open, and the first is given a certain property, classify Gepro-P sets in pn.
So it is very, very general, and this is a starting open problem.
You can consider a property like being Gorinstein, and then you can try to classify Gepro-Gorinstein sets in pn.
You can note that Gepro-Gorinstein sets are Gepro-Gorinstein sets, but not the other way around.
And you can also try to classify Gepro-T sets in pn.
This is also very general, and in this talk I would like to say something about Gepro-T sets in p3, since we don't know any examples in pn.
And we have some classifications in p3.
So let's move to p3, and from now on everything is going on in p3.
So we say that a finite set of points z is an ab Gepro-T set.
If its general projection to a plane is an intersection of curves of degree a and b.
So we have a set of points in p3, and we project this set from a general point to a general plane, and the result lies on the intersection of two curves of degree a and b.
This is an ab Gepro-T set.
And we call the set, the Gepro-T set, the generate if it is contained in a plane.
So here you have two curves, these curves are of degree two.
And our set z contains four points, the intersection points, and then if you take any point somewhere in the space p3, and you project to another plane, the images of these curves would be the curves whose intersection is the complete intersection.
So this is a very simple example, and we don't want to speak about this kind of example.
The question asked by Francesco Polizzi in 2011 was whether every Gepro-T set in p3 is degenerate.
So is it true that all these sets are in fact sets contained in a plane and projected to another plane?
So if we think about the answer, we may think about two curves in p3 intersecting, because in the plane it is what happens.
We have two curves which intersect, and then we project, and the images of these curves would give this complete intersection.
And the theorem of Dufida and Dias from 1986 says that if we have two smooth irreducible non-degenerate curves in p3 of degrees A and B, then the number of intersection points is bounded by this number.
So it is A-1 times B-1 plus 1, so it is not even close to A times B.
So this is not the way how we can construct the Gepro-T set.
Let me mention also the second part of the theorem, the maximal value achieved if both curves are on the same quadric.
I want to mention it because quadrics play a role here in this theorem.
So as I have already said, the set of intersection points of two smooth irreducible non-degenerate curves in p3 of degrees A and B is not an A-B Gepro-T set.
So we have to look for another method to construct or to give examples of such sets.
Okay, so let me tell you what was the answer.
The answer was given by Dmitry Panov in the same year, in 2009.
Let me recall the question was, is every Gepro-T set degenerate?
So does the point lie on a surface already?
And Panov said, no, it is not true.
So there are sets of points which are not on a surface and are Gepro-T, and these sets are called grids.
So what is a grid?
Let me say what is an A-B grid.
An A-B grid is a set of A times B points, which are of the form A intersected with B.
So the intersection of two sets.
And the first set is the union of pairwise disjoint lines.
And the second is the union of, let's say, more pairwise disjoint lines.
So that each lines from the set A meet each line of the set B in exactly one point.
So if we consider the sets in B3, we will just see on a simple example how it looks.
I took it from Brian's presentation, so here we see a two or three grid.
So one set of lines is black lines, and the other set is the orange lines.
So these are two sets in B3 having six intersection points, and these six intersection points are called the grid.
And why grids are Gepro-T sets?
So let us see on the example.
We have this grid in the space, and if we project from a general point in a space to a general hyperplane, then we get the black lines are projected.
So black lines and the orange lines are projected to orange lines.
Of course now the lines intersect, but this is not a problem because we look at the intersection point of the two curves.
One curve is a black curve, and the other curve is the orange curve.
So the black curve intersects with the orange curve in six points, and this is the complete intersection.
So the grid above is a Gepro-T set, here it is a two or three Gepro-T.
Okay, so we may now consider whether there are some other Gepro-T sets which are not the generative and not grids.
We will call these sets non-trivial.
So trivial if they are the generative of grids, and now we are looking for non-trivial, a Gepro-T set.
And the modified question of quality would look like this, is it true that every Gepro-T set in P3 is trivial?
And if it's not trivial, is it possible to classify the Gepro-T sets at the productive equivalence?
Maybe not all, maybe just for some small number of points.
So let us look for, on the first example, this is the, the example is the D4 configuration.
And it was studied by Alessandra Bernardi, Luca Piantini, Graham Benham, Giuseppe Favacchio, Brian Harbourn, Juan Miliore, Thomas Schenberg, and Justina Spahn during the previous lecture workshop in Meditaterme.
So this configuration looks like this.
We have, we have, let's think of a cube, so eight vertices.
Here we have six vertices, and the, sorry, seven vertices, and the other one is hidden behind.
So we take these eight vertices, then we add the vertices, which are the centers of perspectives of all the faces of the cube, and we add the middle point of the cube.
So altogether, these are 12 points, and these, these 12 points form a D4 configuration.
We may also give coordinates to the points, especially when somebody doesn't like to speak about the cube in the productive space.
So this is a set of 12 points with such configuration, such coordinates, is the D4 configuration.
And the D4 configuration lies on four disjoint lines, on different sets of four disjoint lines, let me tell you one set, so this is the set here on this slide.
So, if we have this D4 configuration in P3, we can project to a plane from a general point.
And then, of course, if we project collinear points, we get collinear points in P2, in the hyperplane to which we project.
So, we may take the solid lines, this is one line, then the other line, and this line, these are the lines which cover nine points of the configuration.
And there is also one more line which goes through the front vertex, the middle vertex, and the vertex in the back.
So, if you project the black lines, go to black lines on the right-hand side, this line, which is not visible, the points are not visible, goes to the grey line.
And because the points lie on a cone of D3, we have also the curve of D3 after projection.
So, we can choose the lines differently, so we can choose, for example, the dashed line or the dotted line.
So, there are more possibilities to choose the lines, but in any case, after the projection, the twelve sets lie on four lines and a cubic curve.
So, this is a 3-4 Geoprote set on the bridge.
And it is not agreed why it is not agreed, because we cannot take the curve of D3 to be three lines, because of the position.
We have also another example, it's a four configuration, which I cannot draw, but I can give you the coordinates of the points.
And this configuration consists of 24 points, so two times D4, the number of points in D4, and this is not the coincidence, because the points which are green here are exactly the points of D4 configuration.
And the rest of the points are also D4 configuration, but not somewhere away.
So, two D4 configuration grew up to an F4 configuration of 24 points, which lies on six disjoint lines.
And it's not a 4-6 Geoprote set.
And it is built up with 4-4 grid and on a quadric and two sets of four points which are aligned.
So, in the case of D4, there was a 3-3 grid inside and a line outside.
Now we have 4-4 grid and two lines outside of the bridge.
And we may ask the question, for which pairs of positive integers, A and B, let's say that A is less or equal than B, does there exist a non-trivial Geoprote set?
So, a set which is non-degenerate and it's not very quick.
And we know the theorem from the paper of Gentini and Liora, published in 2021, that if we have a set of non-degenerate and non-degenerate A, B, Geoprote set, when both of A and B are at most three, then Z is a grid.
So, the first, the smaller number of smaller numbers that can occur as A and B, for the set not to be a grid, maybe three and four.
So, the question is to classify all three-four Geoprote sets into three.
And we have a theorem in the preprint from 2022, that if a set Z is a non-degenerate 3B Geoprote set in B3, then there are two possibilities.
The first one is that it is a 3B grid and B is any number.
We assume just B is greater than 3.
And the other option is that it is a D4 configuration, so a 3, 4 Geoprote.
So, this means that there are no Geoprote sets, like 3B Geoprote sets for B greater than 4.
And the proof goes through different cases, whether the points like are in general position, linear general position, or like on the twisted cubic, there are several cases which we consider.
And we come to this result that if you have 3B Geoprote sets, that it must be a D4 or a 3B grid.
So, we ask a question for which pair of integers A and B, which are both above 3, whether exist non-degenerate, non-grid AB Geoprote sets in B3.
So, if you are given AB, can you construct an AB Geoprote set if this A is greater than 3 and B is at least A.
And we manage to give a construction for every pair of AB, at least four.
So, if the construction goes like this, we take the primitive n root of unity, and we take the set of points in P1, which consists of points 11, 1u, 1u to the power, the second power and so on, up to 1 and u to the power n minus 1.
And now we construct the product of these points. So, we look at the points as row or columns vectors, we multiply them, and we get a 4 by 4 matrices by multiplying 1 by 1 every set, every point from A with every point from A.
And we write these matrices as row vectors. So, these are all the multiples of row vector matrices from A.
And we consider the set set to be the set of all these points plus, and we consider also two other sets of points, y1 and y2, which are sets of colina points.
The set x is on a quadric, it is a grid, and y and y1 are outside of this quadric.
And the theorem says that if n is a positive integer, which is at least three, then we have two options. If n is odd, then the set x plus y1 and the set x plus y2 are n times n plus 1 to 36.
And in case n is even, then also the set x plus y1 plus y2 is an n, n plus 2, the product set, and also the sets mentioned in the first part are the product sets.
And moreover, the sets constructed by the standard construction are not grids.
So, we are able to construct an AB, the property set, when A is at least three, for B equal A plus 1 and A odd, or for B equal A plus 2, or A plus 1 or A plus 2, and A even.
But we want to construct also the property sets when the factors, the A and B are different for more than two.
So we have this useful lemma, then if we have a property set, which contains a property subset, so we have an AB property set, and it contains a CB property subset, Z prime.
And a general projection of Z prime shares with the general projection of Z, a minimal generator of the grid B, the second number.
And the residual set, the B's, which is equal Z minus Z prime, is an A minus C, B, the property.
So this lemma allows us to construct the property sets, which are when the A and B are not different by one, but by more.
So as a corollary, we get that for every pair of positive integers, when A is at least four, at B is at least A, there exists a non-degraded and non-degenerate AB, the property set of points in B three.
So now I would like to tell you how this is linked to the weak left-hand property, and the link is via unexpected cones, so there will be a few words about unexpected cones, and then we come to weak left-hand.
And I have shown you the sets before and after.
These sets come from the root systems, and they are proved to have unexpected cones.
This is the paper of Harbour, Miljore, Nagel and Peitler, published in 2012.
And these sets are also non-trivial, the proteases, which are shown in the paper.
So the existence of the unexpected cones is equivalent to the filer of the weak left-hand property.
So if we denote the unexpected cone property by C of D, so this is the property of the existence of an unexpected hyper surface of degree D, and my PPCD.
And then, by Macaulay duality, sets Z satisfies C of D, if and only if the weak left-hand property fails in degree D minus one.
So we have a set of points, P1 to PR, and we have the dual linear forms, L1 to LR, and we have another point, and also the dual linear form to this point.
And then the failure of the weak left-hand property in degree D minus one means that this multiplication doesn't have the maximal rank,
which means that the cone is unexpected.
So now we may ask, because we know that these cones exist, for example, for D4, for F4, we may ask a question, do all the proteases set be failures of the weak left-hand property?
And this is open, so if there is a cone, an unexpected cone, we have the failure of weak left-hand property, but if not, we don't know if there are the proteases which don't have this unexpected one.
And this is how we come to half-grid, so all the sets we consider that were not degenerate and not grid were of the type that after projection we had some lines.
And this is what we call a half-grid, so it is a grid in one way.
So if we had a non-degenerate, non-grid, the protease set, we say that it is a half-grid, if its projection is the intersection of two curves, and exactly one of the curves can be taken as a union of lines.
So if both are the union of lines, that was the grid, and now we consider only one curve to be the union of lines.
And as we have seen, the D4 is a 3-4 half-grid, and it lies on four lines.
And also, all the protease sets obtained from the standard construction are half-grids.
And so we may ask a question, is every non-trivial D4 set a half-grid?
We don't have any general construction here, but we know three examples.
The first example is H4 configuration, which is a 6-10-13 set, and it was studied by Paulina Wichniewska and Maciej Ziemba in 2021.
So this configuration also comes from the root system, but the maximum number of points on the line is 5, so this set cannot be covered by 10 lines.
Also, there are two more examples, one of them is the general configuration, which is 5-8, the protease set, and the other is 10-12, the protease set, and the two last configurations are connected to quantum mechanics.
We don't know whether these examples are just the only ones or there exists some more. It will be interesting to first know this.
So this is an open question to decide whether there are other non-trivial non-half-grid D4 sets.
And if we don't know how to deal with non-trivial non-half-grid D4 sets, we may try to classify half-grids.
So how many non-projectively equivalent half-grids are there?
And we were studying this topic in the preprint from 2023, and the result is the classification of 4-4 half-grids.
So we assume that our set of points is a 4-4 half-grid in P3, and we discovered that there are two possibilities.
So the first one is the unharmonic case, and then in this case the points are S on the slide, and these are the coordinates of the points.
The epsilon is the primitive root of unit of order 6.
And to visualize, we can see that the points in the columns are in line, and also the last row is the row of columnar points.
So one possibility is that the four points lie on four, let's say vertical lines, and also the four plus points lie on a horizontal line.
And the second possibility is called the harmonic case.
The three points have coordinates on the slide, and the collinations are just the vertical ones, so the points in the columns are collinear, and there are no collinearities in the rows.
So this is done. I'm not going into details, I will just tell you some tools we are using.
So we consider permutations, which leave the cross-racial invariant. We have four points on each line, so we may say about the cross-racial of this point.
And we use the notation a, j, k, l is the permutation, which sends 1 to i, 2 to j, 3 to k, and 4 to l.
So this is not a cycle, that's why the commas between the numbers.
So with this notation, first it is well known that the cross-racial is invariant under the line group, so this means that with this notation, if sigma is one of the four permutations listed on the slide, then the cross-racial is invariant.
But these permutations are involuntary, but there are also two more cases, which leave the cross-racial invariant, and this is the harmonic and unharmonic case.
So in the harmonic case, the cross-racial is one of the numbers minus one, one-half and two, and then we have eight more permutations, which leave the cross-racial invariant.
And in the unharmonic case, we have 12 more permutations, which leave the cross-racial invariant.
So we study how the permutation of points on the cross-racial on points on one line is read as a permutation of points on the second line and so forth.
And also the proof uses the fact that if you have four lines in P3, and they are not on the quadric surface, then there are two transversals of these lines.
And also what is very useful is that we can use this result from previous considerations, so if you have four lines, and our half grid lies on these four lines, and we consider the set without one line,
and then our points form a 3-4 grid.
So how do we know it?
They could, the half grid is at the protist set, so if we take out a line, we get a 3-4 protist set, and there are two options, one is a grid, and the other is a default configuration, but the default configuration doesn't have four aligned points.
So this must be, and using this and considering how the permutations on, how the points on the line go to the points on another line using this cross-racial.
And then we get to the theorem that gives, that only this harmonic and unharmonic case, let me go back to this.
This harmonic and unharmonic case are half grids, which, so these are two different type of grids, which are not projectively equivalent, and these are the only possibilities for 4-4 half grids.
So what can we do now?
We can try to classify the four B half grids in P3, and here we also have these transversals, so we know how to start at least.
The open problem is to classify AB half grids, where A is at least 5, and B is greater or equal than 8.
So this is all, thank you, and I hope now you know that this logo is, the default configuration is somehow in this logo, and so you'll know why we are wearing these t-shirts. Thank you.